DREV90957: Regional-Nest 0.3   {#milestone_DREV90957}
============================

\date Last revised: 04/06/2017

Description
-----------

Regional-Nest 0.3 (DREV 90957) is a two-way configuration of the
Nonhydrostatic Mesoscale Model on the B Grid (NMMB) and a regional
configuration of the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM). The main
features of this milestone release include 1) two way coupling between
HYCOM and NMMB with moving nest support; 2) performance enhancement.

This revision has been run for 2 days using initial condition and
boundary condition based on hurricane Patricia and exhibits behavior
that is Earth-like. The initial condition starts at 2015 10 20 12:00
hours. This is the starting time for HYCOM initialization and
integration. This regional HYCOM has a 1/12th degree resolution with
1284x516 data points spanning a geographical region (-179.76, 2.48) to
(-77.12, 39.98). HYCOM works on a regular lat-lon grid over this
geographic region. The regional NMMB grid has a single parent domain
roughly at 0.18 degree resolution with 451x451x42 data points spanning
a geographic region (-40.5, -40.5) with central location (-94.3,
18.4). Resolution of the moving outer nest is 231x201x42, 1/3rd of the
parent domain. Resolution of the moving inner nest is 381x345x42,
1/9th of the parent domain.  The NMMB grids are Lambertian
curvi-linear. It can also be thought of as a rotated lat-lon grid.

SST from HYCOM is interpolated from parent domain to the outer and
inner nest through a combination of interpolation methods: PATCH in
the ocean and nearest neighbor along the coastal line.

Field Exchange
--------------

Currently all fields are transferred using bilinear interpolation. The
following flux fields are transferred between NMMB and HYCOM:

| NMMB->HYCOM              |   HYCOM->NMMB                     |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------- |
| latent heat flux         | sea surface temperature           |
| sensible heat flux       |                                   |      
| net longwave             |                                   |   
| net shortwave            |                                   |
| zonal momentum flux      |                                   |
| meridional momentum flux |                                   |
| precipitation rate       |                                   |
 
Processor Layout and Run Sequences
----------------------------------

The coupled system runs NMMB and HYCOM concurrently. The processor
layout and run sequence are detailed below. HYCOM integrates using
Patricia initial condition. Hycom ignores mediator input on its first
time step. HYCOM then uses mediator input in subsequent time steps
after NMMB has integrated and provides valid input in precipitation,
radiative fluxes, heat fluxes, and momentum fluxes at couping
intervals.

| Component  | Processor Layout   |
| ---------- | ------------------ |
| NMMB       | 0-249              |
| HYCOM      | 250-393            |
| MEDIATOR   | 394-453            |

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
      @
    ::
 
Validation
----------

###  Parent Domain

\image html "DREV90957_d01_sst_001hrs.png" "Plots of SST ingested in NMMB from HYCOM are shown here at 01 hr, 48 hr"

\image html "DREV90957_d01_sst_048hrs.png" "SST received by NMMB parent nest after one hour model simulation time. By now HYCOM has run 2 time steps and sends updated SST to NMMB."

SST received by NMMB parent nest at 48 hr of model simulation.

### Moving Outer Nest

\image html "DREV90957_d02_sst_001hrs.png" "SST received by NMMB outer nest after one hour model simulation time."

\image html "DREV90957_sst_d02_48hrs.png" "SST received by NMMB outer nest at 48 hr of model simulation."

### Moving Inner Nest

\image html "DREV90957_d03_sst_001hrs.png" "SST received by NMMB inner nest after one hour model simulation time."

\image html "DREV90957_d03_sst_048hrs.png" "SST received by NMMB inner nest at 48 hr of model simulation."

Limitation of this milestone release
------------------------------------
 
Download and Build
------------------

This revision can be downloaded with the following command:

    svn co -r 90957 https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/Regional-Nest

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are
discussed in section 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 in the NEMS User's Guide and
Reference.

The coupled system can be built with the following command after
download is complete:

    ./NEMS/NEMSAppBuilder

Running the Patricia moving nest compset
----------------------------------------

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

 +  cfsr%2015102012_48hr%nest_nmm_hycom%1_12th

To run compsets, start within the UGCS-Seasonal directory and execute
the NEMS CompsetRun tool by typing:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset NEMS/compsets/cfsr%2015102012_48hr%nest_nmm_hycom%1_12th

Currently, the data files are only set up on Theia. The data files for HYCOM can be found at:

    /scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/HYCOM/REGIONAL_HEP20/

Data files for NMMB can be found at:

    /scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/RT-Baselines/NMMB_patricia_nests
