DREV61075: Reg-Hydro 0.1 {#milestone_DREV61075}
========================

\date 9/1/2015

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/Regional/trunk

Description
-----------

DREV61075: Regional 0.1, is an internal delivery of a modeling
application in which GSM-CICE-MOM5 run side-by-side with WRF-Hydro as
a hydraulics/routing component and LIS/Noah.3.3 as a land surface
model.  This is a technical milestone required to arrive at a fully
coupled system.  The global components (GSM-CICE-MOM5) are currently
used in the system as stand ins for the regional atmosphere-ice-ocean
components. (Full NUOPC interfaces are not yet available, e.g., for
NMMB).  Side-by-side indicates that the WRF-Hydro and LIS components
do not communicate with the other components, so no coupling fields
are exchanged.  In order to run these components side-by-side they
require forcing data input files relevant to the calendar and
timesteps for the run.
 
NUOPC "caps" are provided for both WRF-Hydro and LIS allowing these
components to work in NUOPC-compliant systems.
 
Code Repositories
-----------------

WRF-Hydro source code is available in the 
[external_components directory of the NEMS SVN repository](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/couplednems/external_components).  
It is maintained there as a clone of the official WRF-Hydro repository
at NCAR (privately hosted on GitHub).  Specifically, the version used
for the v0.1 Regional app is:
 
 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/external_comps/WRFHYDRO/trunk/NDHM  (revision 61047)
 
LIS source code is also available in the external_components directory
of the NEMS SVN repository.  It is maintained as a clone of the
official LIS repository hosted at NASA-NCCS (private access).
 
 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/external_comps/LIS/branches/nuopc (revision 61000)

 Validation

Previous revisions of WRF-Hydro ran coupled to an atmosphere with an
embedded land or standalone with its own embedded land.  To isolate
the hydraulics component of WRF-Hydro, a new function was added that
is capable of reading land model output from file and is used in place
of an active land component as input to the channel routing
component. This feature was used in a native (outside NUOPC/NEMS) run
of WRF-Hydro to generate a baseline output for a 24 hour run where
land forcing data is provided hourly on a 268x260 domain.  The native
run produces hourly streamflow values at station locations with
lat/lon coordinates.  The outside NUOPC/NEMS standalone hydraulic
component is compiled with the compile_offline_NoahMP.csh script.  In
order to turn off the embedded land the hrldas configuration file
forcing type value must be set to 8.  Validation is carried out
through ncdiff comparison of the standalone run and regional run
output of qlink1, the streamflow output, over a 4 hour time window on
December 01, 2009.  The land surface forcing data used was originally
from a 2013 run, but the files were renamed to appear as a 2009 run in
order to share a common time domain for the side-by-side run.

After building LIS using the compile script a LIS executable capable
of running a standalone (outside NUOPC/NEMS) surface model is placed
in the root directory.  In order to run the LIS executable in
standalone mode the lis configuration file running mode value is set
to 'retrospective'.  Validation is carried out through ncdiff
comparisons of the standalone run and output of SoilMoist_tavg over a
4 hour time window on December 01, 2009.

Four hours is chosen as a quick test that will run in under 30 minutes
on Theia.

Run Sequence
------------

The NEMS run-time configuration for the default Regional configuration
is provided below.  Note that LND and HYD are run on disjoint
processor sets, so they will run concurrently in each of the time
loops and no data will be exchanged.  For details on the run sequence
in general please refer to the 
\ref configuring
and
\ref architecture
pages.

    runSeq::
      @7200.0
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        @3600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
                  LND
          HYD
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
      @
    ::
 
Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) are provided on the Regional
application page.