DREV80567 (DREV87736) UGCS-Seasonal 0.3 {#milestone_DREV80567}
=======================================

\date Last revised: 2/3/2017

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/trunk

Important notes about this revision
-----------------------------------

\warning
After the release of this DREV80567 revision, Github made
changes to their repository software that resulted in incorrect
mappings when Github revisions were used as SVN externals. This
resulted in the DREV80567 UGCS-Seasonal application pulling in
different and arbitrary revisions of its constituent components,
causing the application to crash. A subsequent fix from Github
restored the correct mappings.
\p In order to avoid this issue in the future, explicit tags are now
being used to pull in Github revisions from SVN. An identical version
of the original DREV80567 was defined using tags as
DREV87736. Although DREV80567 appears to be working correctly, we
recommend that revision DREV87736 be used instead of DREV80567 as it
is designed to avoid repository issues in the future.

Note also that in order to run this milestone on Theia, you must have
a ~/.cshrc file in your home directory that contains the line "limit
stacksize unlimited". The ~/.cshrc with this line must exist no matter
what shell you are using!  Description

UGCS-Seasonal 0.3 (DREV80567/DREV87736) is a three-way configuration
of the 
[Global Spectral Model (GSM)](http://www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/index.php?branch=GFS),
[Modular Ocean Model 5 (MOM5)](http://mom-ocean.org/web), and
[Los Alamos Sea Ice Model (CICE)](http://oceans11.lanl.gov/trac/CICE/). GSM runs on a 
\ref GRID_Reduced_T574 "T574 grid", and MOM5 and
CICE run on a 
\ref GRID_mom5_0p5deg_tripole "0.5 degree tripolar global grid with 0.25 degree tropics."
A full set of fields is transferred among components using the NEMS
mediator
([see exchange field spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Tae7NoGbIfti38QxvmzPy7Z4tIWQgY4zSdq5Xcx9MDk/edit?usp=sharing)).

\todo add and link to grid pages

Relative to 
\ref milestone_DREV73964 "UGCS-Seasonal 0.2".
this revision added the capability to peform basic restarts. This
required modifications to the NEMS mediator and CICE so that restarts
could be written at more flexible time intervals. This revision also
included a command-line version of the NEMS AppBuilder. The unphysical
wind stresses in the northern ocean present in UGCS-Seasonal 0.2 were
resolved with a sign fix in the ocean/ice stress that the ocean
sees. Ice initial conditions were updated for the runs performed, and
now include snow on ice. This revision also includes performance
optimizations. Both the initialize and run phases of the coupled
system were profiled and optimized. The performance at the conclusion
of the optimization process was approximately that of a similarly
configured version of CFSv2. In addition, a check in the mediator was
removed that fills in SST and sea ice temp fields on "unset" (land)
points to 271 deg C before doing a merge.

This revision has been run for more than 30 days and exhibits behavior
that is Earth-like.

A limitation of this revision is that fluxes are known to be computed
inconsistently. The atmosphere/ocean flux over open water is computed
in GSM and merged with the atmosphere/land flux. The atmosphere/ocean
flux computed in the mediator uses a different algorithm, based on
CESM code. The ice/ocean flux and ice fraction are computed in CICE.

A short-term fix was requested by EMC scientists and implemented, but
it is not in this DREV80567 revision. It is available as revision
84966 on a flux_update branch. In this fix, the atmosphere/ocean flux
that the ocean model uses over open water is the GSM atmosphere/ocean
flux (using the mask sent from GSM to exclude the atmosphere/land
flux). For points that have some fractional ice, a merge of the
mediator atmosphere/ocean flux plus the ice/ocean flux from CICE is
used. The atmosphere/ocean flux that the atmosphere model uses is
basically the same as what the ocean uses.  Over open water, GSM uses
the atmosphere/ocean flux it computes internally. Where there is some
fractional ice, the GSM uses the merged atmosphere/ocean/ice flux
provided by the mediator. The issue with the fix is that although the
components now see the same fluxes, there is a discontinuity at the
points where open ocean meets fractional ice, since the
atmosphere/ocean fluxes for open ocean and ice fraction are still
computed using different algorithms.  Run Sequences

UGCS-Seasonal includes two run sequences, a cold start sequence and a
time integration sequence.

Cold start sequence: The first cold start sequence initializes
components using a miinimal set of files ingested by GSM. The cold
start sequence only needs to run for a half hour. However, it runs for
an hour because there is a limitation on running less than an hour in
EMC scripts.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ICE
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
      @
    ::

Time integration sequence: The second run sequence, shown below, is
for the time integration loop. It is initialized by restart files
generated by the cold start sequence. As in UGCS--Seasonal 0.1, there
is a fast and a slow loop, at 10 minutes and 30 minutes, respectively.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        MED MedPhase_write_restart
      @
    ::

Validation
----------

The following slides show resolution of the unphysical northern ocean
wind stresses, before (left) and after (right) the sign change. The
results are shown after a 5-day run. (From A. Craig.)

\image html DREV80567-ocnspeed_120h.gif
\image html DREV80567-ocnspeed_new_120h.gif

These results are from a development system and do not represent a NOAA prediction or product. 

Download, Build, Run, and Restart
---------------------------------

### Download and Build

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are
discussed in the
\ref documentation "NEMS User's Guide and Reference".
Running UGCS-Seasonal with a cold start requires additional
instructions, below.

Please see Important notes about this revision section at the top of
this page.  Cold Start and Run

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

 * `cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`
 * `cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`

To run compsets, start within the UGCS-Seasonal directory and execute
the NEMS CompsetRun tool by typing:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset <compset name>

If you leave off the -compset argument, CompsetRun will read the
compset list from a local file.

To initialize a new case of the UGCS-Seasonal from a cold start, run
the cold start compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`, to
generate initial mediator restart files.  That compset runs the
atm/ice/ocean sequentially for 1 hour. It will generate some initial
mediator restart files consisting of initial values for coupling
fields consistent with the current atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice
conditions.  You then use those initial mediator files to startup a
standard run with the same model initial conditions and initial model
date as the cold start run.  To do this, run the coldstart compset
using CompsetRun as specified above with the compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`.

After running the cold start compset, go into NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun and
modify "setup_med_nems" to pre-stage the cold start mediator restart
files instead of whatever files are set by default.  This is done in a
section that looks like:

    cp -f ${DATADIR}/MED_NEMS/${nemsgrid}${nemsgridinp}/* ${RUNDIR}
    #  cp -f /scratch3/NCEPDEV/stmp1/Anthony.Craig/UGCS-Seasonal.r72808/20150401short_nemscold_gsm_cice_mom5/mediator*restart* ${RUNDIR}

(You will need to adjust the directory, compset, and revision for this milestone.)

Comment out the first line and uncomment the second line. In the
second line, set the path to the cold start run directory where the
cold start case just ran.  This will copy the mediator restart files
from your cold start run directory into the new run directory.

Once the cold start is done and the NEMSCompsetRun is modified, run a
standard compset like
`cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5` to advance the
model from the initial conditions.  The system will start with the
same atmosphere, ocean, and ice initial conditions as the cold start
run plus the new mediator restart files, and the model will run
concurrently.