DREV76675: WAM-IPE 0.3 Send Data Fields from WAM to IPE {#milestone_DREV76675}
=======================================================

\date 05/31/2016

Repository URL
--------------

 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/ipe/WAM-IPE

Description
-----------

\todo link to WAM and IPE grid pages

This milestone is an internal release of a NEMS application with two
active components. The active components are the
[Ionosphere Plasmasphere Electrodynamics (IPE) model](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/IPE)
and the
[Whole Atmosphere Model (WAM)](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/WAM)
All field exchanges in the system occur through the
\ref sw_mediator "space weather mediator".
This is a technical (non-scientific) milestone
to ensure that field data is passed correctly from WAM through the
mediator and then to IPE. In this revision WAM runs on a global 3D
reduced Gaussian grid (\ref GRID_wam "WAM grid"). The horizontal resolution is
T62. The vertical component of this grid is 150 levels in pressure and
has to be converted to height in order to couple with IPE. Because the
relationship between pressure and height varies during a run, the
actual heights of the levels of the WAM grid varies during a run. The
maximum height of the WAM grid is approximately 800 km.  In this
revision IPE runs on an 80 x 170 flux tube grid (\ref GRID_IPE "IPE grid")
that extends up to approximately 360,000 km. Because of the
difference in heights, the WAM grid only overlaps with the bottom of
the IPE grid. The amount of the overlap depends on the current height
of the WAM grid.

NUOPC "caps", which are essentially wrappers for the coupling
interface, are provided for all model components allowing these
components to work in NEMS and other NUOPC-compliant systems. For
example, the "IPE cap" allows the IPE model to work as a part of the
NEMS system.

In this release only a subset of possible fields are exchanged between
WAM and IPE. The
[coupling fields spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/a/noaa.gov/spreadsheets/d/1eA9134T3NSvxPKLsZ-Ryth7_fsAU5FjmgAseApov9eY/pubhtml)
indicates in detail the status of the different coupled fields.

* The WAM output fields are extracted each time-step during the
  dynamics calculation part of the model code. The extraction and
  calculation necessary to generate the fields required by IPE are
  done by the subroutine get_w_z(). For efficiency's sake this is only
  done when WAM is running coupled to IPE. That this is occurring is
  indicated by setting the wam_ipe_coupling namelist variable to
  true. The fields are stored in the
  get_variables_for_WAM_IPE_coupling module. From there they are
  extracted by the WAM cap and passed out to the mediator.

* The IPE input fields advertised only represent a subset of the full
  fields used by IPE. The reason for this is that the WAM and IPE
  grids only overlap at the bottom of the IPE grid. Transferring the
  entire IPE grid to the mediator would be inefficient, so only the
  part that potentially overlaps with WAM is transferred and used for
  regridding. In the IPE cap the fields received from the mediator are
  copied into a variable (wamfield) which has the full index space of
  the IPE fields. This transfer is complex because both
  representations of the data are collapsed to 1D for efficiency's
  sake. Once in the wamfield variable the data is extrapolated to fill
  the empty region. If acting as part of a coupled system, IPE uses
  the data from wamfield as part of it's computations. In this
  technical milestone, we will examine the data in wamfield to verify
  that it was transferred correctly from WAM.

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) and the supported compsets are provided
on the WAM-IPE Build & Run page.  Run Sequence

\todo reference the WAM-IPE Build & Run page.

The NEMS run-time configuration for the WAM-IPE system is provided below.  For details on the run sequence in general please refer to the 
\ref architecture "Technical Architecture page",
and
\ref configuring "Run Configuration"
page.

    runSeq::
     @21600.0
       ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
       MED
       MED -> IPM :remapMethod=redist
       ATM
       IPM
     @
    ::

Validation
----------

The validation procedure for this milestone is to compare the coupling
fields in WAM to the fields after they've been transferred to
IPE. This comparison is used to determine if the fields are being
communicated correctly between the two models.  Because the fields are
being regridded between the two models the transfer isn't expected to
be exact, and so a visual comparison was used to check if the fields
are reasonably similar.

The pairs of images in each of the following sections are from the
visual check of the correctness of the transfer of the fields. Each
section contains a pair of images for a different field.The top image
is of the field at an average height of 94.11 km in WAM. The bottom
image is of the same field at a height of 94 km in IPE after being
transferred from WAM.  Each image is a plot of the points making up
the field with the color indicating the field's values. This type of
plot was used to show the difference in the grids as well as the
values. Because the fields are at a slightly different height and
because regridding isn't exact, there is the appearance of some
difference in the field between the two plots. However, after
examining the images, the conclusion was that the transfer happened
correctly in each case.

During this test both components run for a one hour simulation,
coupling every three minutes.

A test report is available for this validation run: 
\subpage REPORT-20160531-WAM-IPE-initial-1way

### Field Temp_Neutral

\image html DREV76675-nt_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-nt_ipe.png

### Field Northward_Wind_Neutral

\image html DREV76675-nwn_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-nwn_ipe.png

### Field Eastward_Wind_Neutral

\image html DREV76675-ewn_nam.png
\image html DREV76675-ewn_ipe.png

### Field Upward_Wind_Neutral

\image html DREV76675-uwn_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-uwn_ipe.png

### Field O_Density

\image html DREV76675-o_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-o_ipe.png
 
### Field O2_Density

\image html DREV76675-o2_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-o2_ipe.png

### Field N2_Density

\image html DREV76675-n2_wam.png
\image html DREV76675-n2_ipe.png

Limitations and Technical Notes
-------------------------------

This milestone is purely a verification of the transfer of data. The
results of this coupling haven't been scientifically validated and so
shouldn't be expected to behave in a physically realistic manner.