DREV93202: UGCS-Seasonal 0.5 {#milestone_DREV93202}
============================

\date 5/24/2017

Repository URL
--------------

 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/branches/external_land

Subversion Revision: r93202

Description
-----------

This milestone is a version of the atmosphere-ocean-ice coupled
UGCS-Seasonal application with the addition of external land surface
(LIS/Noah 3.3) and hydrology (WRF-Hydro) components. The land surface
and hydrology components are one-way coupled, receiving their import
states from the NEMS Mediator. LIS/Noah 3.3 runs on a global T574
domain and WRF-Hydro runs on a 
\ref GRID_Front_Range_Regional "small regional grid". The ATM-OCN-ICE
components are initialized with April 1, 2015 CFSR-based initial
conditions. No spin-up run has been completed for the land surface and
hydrology components, so both LIS and WRF-Hydro are initialized with
cold start conditions.

\todo reference grids

This is a follow-on to the 
\ref milestone_DREV70089 "Reg-Hydro 0.2 release" with the following changes:

* The separate atmosphere layer (NEMS/src/atmos) originally in NEMS
  has been removed and GSM is using its own NUOPC cap. This was
  accomplished by branching off of the ATM-refactor branch.

* A complete set of coupling fields are sent from the Mediator to LIS
  and WRF-Hydro. Previously, only a subset of fields were transferred
  to validate grid interpolation.

* GSM is in semi-Lagrangian mode on the T574 grid.  The previous
  milestone used the Eulerian dycore on the T126 grid.

* CICE and MOM use 
  \ref GRID_mom5_0p5deg_tripole "0.5 degree tripolar grids".  The
  previous milestone used 1 degree tripolar grids.

* LIS is running on the reduced T574 grid with coldstart initial
  values.  The previous milestone ran on the T126 grid.  New
  configuration options have been added to the LIS cap including: the
  ability to write NUOPC state restart files, log optimizations,
  compilation with debugging.

* WRF-Hydro continues to run on the Front Range regional domain with
  coldstart initial values.  New configuration options have been added
  to the WRF-Hydro cap including: the ability to write NUOPC state
  restart files, log optimizations, and compilation with debugging

The milestone has been validated by (1) ensuring that the original
three-way coupled system produces physically realistic mediator
restart files, (2) validating the quality of the regridding between
ATM->LND and LND->HYD in the Mediator, and (3) verifying that the
LIS/Noah 3.3 and WRF-Hydro produce physically releastic output from
cold start conditions after 1 day and 5 day runs.

The release is available on the "external_land" branch listed
above. No effort was made to merge back to the trunk due to recent
significant NEMS build/run infrastructure changes.

Run Sequences
-------------

UGCS-Seasonal includes two run sequences, a cold start sequence and a
time integration sequence.

<b>Cold start sequence</b>: The first cold start sequence initializes
components using a minimal set of files ingested by GSM. The cold
start sequence only needs to run for a half hour. However, it runs for
an hour because there is a limitation on running less than an hour in
EMC scripts.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_prep_lnd
          MED -> LND :remapMethod=redist
          LND
          LND -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_prep_hyd
          MED -> HYD :remapMethod=redist
          HYD
          HYD -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ICE
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
      @
    ::

<b>Time integration sequence</b>: The second run sequence, shown
below, is for the time integration loop. It is initialized by restart
files generated by the cold start sequence. There is a fast and a slow
loop, at 10 minutes and 30 minutes, respectively.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED MedPhase_prep_hyd
          MED MedPhase_prep_lnd
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> LND :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> HYD :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          LND
          HYD
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          LND -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          HYD -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        MED MedPhase_write_restart
      @
    ::

New Coupling Fields
-------------------

### Mediator to LIS

| Standard Name                 | Units      | Interpolation Method |
| :---------------------------- | :--------- | :------------------- |
| inst_down_lw_flx              | W m-2      | conservative         |
| inst_down_sw_flx              | W m-2      | conservative         |
| inst_merid_wind_height_lowest | m s-1      | bilinear             |
| inst_pres_height_surface      | Pa         | bilinear             |
| inst_spec_humid_height_lowest | kg kg-1    | bilinear             |
| inst_temp_height_lowest       | K          | bilinear             |
| inst_zonal_wind_height_lowest | m s-1      | bilinear             |
| mean_prec_rate                | kg m-2 s-1 | conservative         |


### LIS to Mediator


| Standard Name                        | Units | Interpolation Method |
| :----------------------------------- | :---- | :------------------- |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_1          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_2          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_3          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_4          | K     | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_1     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_2     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_3     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_4     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_2 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_3 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_4 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| surface_runoff_flux                  | m s-1 | conservative         |
| subsurface_runoff_flux               | m s-1 | conservative         |

### Mediator to WRF-Hydro
 
| Standard Name                        | Units | Interpolation Method |
| :----------------------------------- | :---- | :------------------- |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_1          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_2          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_3          | K     | bilinear             |
| temperature_of_soil_layer_4          | K     | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_1     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_2     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_3     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| moisture_content_of_soil_layer_4     | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_2 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_3 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_4 | m m-1 | bilinear             |
| surface_runoff_flux                  | m s-1 | conservative         |
| subsurface_runoff_flux               | m s-1 | conservative         |

Validation
----------

UGCS-Seasonal 0.5 did not bit-for-bit reproduce the NEMS mediator
restart files generated from the Atm Refactor work or the NEMS
mediator restart files generated from 
\ref milestone_DREV88884 "UGCS-Seasonal 0.4".  Note that
the Atm Refactor work also did not bit-for-bit reproduce the NEMS
mediator restart files generated from 
\ref milestone_DREV88884 "UGCS-Seasonal 0.4".  There have
been changes made to the NEMS run system that are likely to link in
different initialization conditions.  Milestone validation was carried
out through


1. Producing data plots of all ATM-LND and LND-HYD coupled fields and
   inspecting the regridding.

2. Producing data plots of LIS output including all eight Noah.3.3
   meterological forcing fields, soil temperatures, soil moisture
   content, liquid fraction of soil moisture content, and runoff.

3. Producing data plots of WRF-Hydro output including streamflow.

###  NEMS Mediator Regridding Samples (2015-04-01:00:01:00)

\image html DREV93202-shade_MED_FROM_ATM_inst_temp_height_lowest_4.gif
\image html DREV93202-shade_MED_TO_HYD_temperature_of_soil_layer_1_4.gif

### NEMS Mediator End of Run Samples (2015-04-06:00:00:00)

\image html DREV93202-shade_MEDIATOR_inst_spec_humid_height_lowest_1.gif
\image html DREV93202-shade_MEDIATOR_moisture_content_of_soil_layer_1_1.gif

###  LIS Output End of Run Samples (2015-04-06:00:00:00)

\image html DREV93202-shade_LIS_Qair_f_tavg_1.gif
\image html DREV93202-shade_LIS_SoilMoist_tavg_1.gif

###  WRF-Hydro Output End of Run Samples (2015-04-06:00:00:00)

\image html DREV93202-streamflow.gif

Sample Plots: https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/couplednems/ugcs-seasonal_0_5_plots

Download, Build, Run, and Restart
---------------------------------

### Download and Build

To check out and build the application:

    svn co -r92981 https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/branches/external_land UGCS_seasonal_0_5
    cd UGCS_seasonal_0_5
    ./NEMS/NEMSAppBuilder

General instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application
are discussed in section 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 in the NEMS User's Guide and
Reference.

\todo Update guide reference when the guide is finished

### Cold Start, 1 Day Run, and 5 Day Run

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

Coupled

    cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5
    cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5
    cfsr%20150401_5day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5

Side-by-Side/Standalone

    cfsr%20150401_1day_sbys_lis%T574
    cfsr%20150401_1day_sbys_wrfhydro%frontrange

To run the default UGCS-Seasonal compset list, use this command from the app directory:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun

Note: The default UGCS-Seasonal compset list includes the 1 hour coldstart and 1 day restart. In order to run the 5 day restart or the 30 day restart please change the QUEUE value set in NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun

To run a specific compset:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset <compset name>

Note: In order to run the 5 day restart or the 30 day restart please
change the QUEUE value set in NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun

Mediator Restart Files
----------------------

The NEMS Mediator is capable of reading in a set of restart files
containing initial values of coupling fields. This is required in
order to run components concurrently. NEMS Mediator restart files are
provided on Theia as part of this release, so it is not required to
generate new restart files. However, the process is documented below
in case new restarts need to be generated. Note this is the same
process as is documented in the 
\ref milestone_DREV88884 "UGCS-Seasonal 0.4" release.

\note NEMS Mediator restart files are provided on Theia as part of
this release, so it is not required to generate new restart
files. However, the process is documented below in case new restarts
need to be generated. Note this is the same process as is documented
in the 
\ref milestone_DREV88884 "UGCS-Seasonal 0.4" release.

To initialize a new case of the UGCS-Seasonal from a cold start, run
the cold start compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`,
to generate initial mediator restart files.  This compset runs the
atm/land/hyd/ice/ocean sequentially for 1 hour. It will generate some
initial mediator restart files consisting of initial values for
coupling fields consistent with the current atmosphere, ocean, sea
ice, land, and hydrology conditions.  You then use those initial
mediator files to startup a standard run with the same model initial
conditions and initial model date as the cold start run.  To do this,
run the coldstart compset using CompsetRun as specified above with the
compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`.

After running the cold start compset, go into NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun and
modify "setup_med_nems" to pre-stage the cold start mediator restart
files instead of whatever files are set by default.  This is done in a
section that looks like:

    cp -f ${DATADIR}/MED_NEMS/${nemsgrid}${nemsgridinp}/* ${RUNDIR}
    # cp -f /scratch3/NCEPDEV/stmp1/Anthony.Craig/UGCS-Seasonal.r72808/20150401short_nemscold_gsm_cice_mom5/mediator*restart* ${RUNDIR}

(You will need to adjust the copy from path to your coldstart run directory.)

Comment out the first line and uncomment the second line. In the
second line, set the path to the cold start run directory where the
cold start case just ran.  This will copy the mediator restart files
from your cold start run directory into the new run directory.

Once the cold start is done and the NEMSCompsetRun is modified, run a
standard compset like
cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_lis%T574_wrfhydro%frontrange_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5
to advance the model from the initial conditions.  The system will
start with the same atmosphere, ocean, and ice initial conditions as
the cold start run plus the new mediator restart files, and the model
will run concurrently.