DREV79954: Regional-Nest 0.1 Single Domain Coupling {#milestone_DREV79954}
===================================================

\date 10/12/2016

Description
-----------

Regional-Nest 0.1 (DREV79954) is a one-way configuration of the
Nonhydrostatic Mesoscale Model on the B Grid (NMMB) and a regional
configuration of the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM).

This revision has been run for 2 days using initial condition and
boundary condition based on hurricane Patricia and exhibits behavior
that is Earth-like. The initial condition starts at 2015 10 20 12:00
hours. This is the starting time for HYCOM initialization and
integration. This regional hycom has a 1/12th degree resolution with
1284x516 data points spanning a geographical region (-179.76, 2.48) to
(-77.12, 39.98). HYCOM works on a regular lat-lon grid over this
geographic region. The regional NMMB grid has a single parent domain
roughly at 1/4 degree resolution with 451x451 data points spanning a
geographic region (-149.47, -25.71) to (-39.13, 58.9). The NMMB grid
is a Lambertian curvi-linear grid. It can also be thought of as a
rotated lat-lon grid.  Field Exchange

Currently all fields are transferred using bilinear interpolation. The
following flux fields are transferred between NMMB and HYCOM:

| NMMB->HYCOM |   HYCOM->NMMB |
| ----------- | ------------- |
| latent heat flux |        sea surface temperature |
| sensible heat flux       | &nbsp; |
| net longwave   | &nbsp; |
| net shortwave    | &nbsp; |
| zonal momentum flux       | &nbsp; |
| meridional momentum flux         | &nbsp; |
| precipitation rate    | &nbsp; |
 
Run Sequences
-------------

The coupled system starts with HYCOM integrating first using Patricia
initial condition. Hycom ignores mediator input on its first time
step. Mediator input is used in subsequent time steps after NMMB has
been initialized from HYCOM SST and provides valid input in
precipitation, radiative fluxes, heat fluxes, and momentum fluxes.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
      @
    ::
 
Validation
----------

Three plots of SST ingested in NMMB from HYCOM are shown here at 01
hr, 48 hr, and the difference between them.


\image html DREV77954-sst_domain01_nonests_1hr.png SST received by NMMB after one hour model simulation time. By now HYCOM has run 2 time steps and sends updated SST to NMMB

\image html DREV77954-sst_domain01_nonests_48hrs.png  SST received by NMMB at 48 hr of model simulation.

\image html DREV77954-diff_sst_end_01.png   Difference in SST received by NMMB between 1 hour and 48 hr of model simulation time. One can also see in this diagram the outline of the regional HYCOM model overlapping with the regional NMMB model.

\image html DREV77954-2way_minus_1way_diff_sst.png  Difference in SST received by NMMB at 48 hr of model simulation time between 1 way coupling HYCOM->NMMB and 2 way coupling HYCOM\<->NMMB.


Download and Build
------------------

This revision can be downloaded with the following command:

    svn co -r 79954 https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/Regional-Nest

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are
discussed in the 
ref documentation "NEMS User's Guide and Reference".

The coupled system can be built with the following command after
download is complete:

    ./NEMS/NEMSAppBuilder

Running the Patricia single parent domain compset

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

* `patricia_nems_nmm_cice_hycom`

To run compsets, start within the UGCS-Seasonal directory and execute
the NEMS CompsetRun tool by typing:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset NEMS/compsets/patricia_nems_nmm_cice_hycom

Currently, the data files are only set up on Theia. The data files for HYCOM can be found at:

    /scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/HYCOM/REGIONAL_HEP20/

Data files for NMMB can be found at:

    /scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/RT-Baselines/NMMB_patricia_nests
