DREV73436: WAM-IPE 0.2 Send Analytical Fields from WAM to IPE {#milestone_DREV73436}
=============================================================

\date 04/04/2016

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/ipe/WAM-IPE

Description
-----------

\todo make IPE pages

\todo make WAM pages

This milestone is an internal release of a NEMS application with one
active component and one data component. The active component is the
[Ionosphere Plasmasphere Electrodynamics (IPE)](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/IPE)
model. The data component is the data version of the 
[Whole Atmosphere Model (WAM)](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/WAM). 
The name of the data component is DATAWAM.  All field exchanges in the
system occur through the 
\ref sw_mediator "space weather mediator". This is a technical
(non-scientific) milestone to ensure that field data is passed
correctly from WAM through the mediator and then down through the IPE
cap to the model itself. In this milestone, analytic fields are used
to validate the transfer of data, so the data coming into IPE from
mediator isn't physically correct. Therefore, the output from IPE is
not expected to be realistic. In this revision DATAWAM runs on a
global 3D reduced Gaussian grid (\ref GRID_wam "WAM grid").
The horizontal resolution is T62. The vertical component of this grid
is 150 levels in pressure and has to be converted to height in order
to couple with IPE. Because the relationship between pressure and
height varies during a run, the actual heights of the levels of the
WAM grid varies during a run. The maximum height of the WAM grid is
approximately 800 km.  In this revision IPE runs on an 80 x 170 flux
tube grid (\ref GRID_IPE "IPE grid") that extends up to approximately 360,000
km. Because of the difference in heights, the WAM grid only overlaps
with the bottom of the IPE grid. The amount of the overlap depends on
the current height of the WAM grid.

 NUOPC "caps", which are essentially wrappers for the coupling interface, are provided for all model components allowing these components to work in NEMS and other NUOPC-compliant systems.  The version of each component used is:

* DATAWAM
* IPE

\todo add pages for DATAWAM and IPE

In this release only a subset of possible fields are exchanged between
DATAWAM and IPE. The 
[coupling fields spreadsheet](http://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ThbEHNh2ZV7PMdcsitEt4wz5CZkojlANK4hszkLdNAs/edit#gid=0)
indicates in detail the status of the different coupled fields.

 * DATAWAM fields are built to simulate output from WAM. To do this
   they are built on a 2D unstructured mesh which represents the 2D
   shuffled reduced-Gaussian grid of the WAM model. The 2D WAM
   information (e.g. coordinates) used to construct this grid are read
   in from a file. DATAWAM exports height information as a 3D field
   built on the 2D grid. The WAM model's vertical coordinate is at
   fixed pressure levels, so its actual height varies time-step by
   time-step. To simulate this variation, DATAWAM's height field is
   generated analytically every time-step using a random number
   generator. The data fields output by DATAWAM are filled with an
   analytic function so that the quality of the transfer can be
   checked in IPE.
     
 * The IPE input fields advertised only represent a subset of the full
   fields used by IPE. The reason for this is that the WAM and IPE
   grids only overlap at the bottom of the IPE grid. Transferring the
   entire IPE grid to the mediator would be inefficient, so only the
   part that potentially overlaps with WAM is transferred and used for
   regridding. In the IPE cap the fields received from the mediator
   are copied into a variable (wamfield) which has the full index
   space of the IPE fields. This transfer is complex because both
   representations of the data are collapsed to 1D for efficiency's
   sake. Once in the wamfield variable the data is extrapolated to
   fill the empty region. If acting as part of a coupled system, IPE
   uses the data from wamfield as part of it's computations. In this
   technical milestone, we will examine the data in wamfield to verify
   that it was transferred correctly from DATAWAM.
     

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) and the supported compsets are provided
on the 
[WAM-IPE Build & Run](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/build_run)
page.  

\todo migrate WAM-IPE Build & Run page

Run Sequence
------------

The NEMS run-time configuration for the default Regional configuration
is provided below.  For details on the run sequence in general please
refer to the 
\ref configuring
and
\ref architecture
pages.

    runSeq::
     @21600.0
       ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
       MED
       MED -> IPM :remapMethod=redist
       ATM
       IPM
     @
    ::

Validation
----------

The validation procedure for this milestone is to verify the correct
transfer of analytic fields from DATAWAM to IPE.  This transfer
includes redistribution from DATAWAM to the mediator, regridding in
the mediator, redistribution from the mediator to the IPE cap and then
the connection from the IPE cap to the model itself.  To verify the
connection, the average relative error is computed between the
transferred field in the IPE model and the exact analytic value that
it was set to in DATAWAM. If this error is equal to or smaller than
the expected maxium error (1.0E-4) then the transfer is considered
correct.

The analytic function used for the validation is the function
F=cos(lat)2 *cos(2*lon) + 0.004*height + 1.0 where (lat,lon) are the
latitude and longitude coordinates of the points and height is the
height of the point in km.

During this test both components run for a two day simulation,
coupling every six hours.

A test report is available for the validation run:

 * [Space Weather One-Way Connection to IPE Test Report.](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/couplednems/IPE_Cap_Integration_Test_Report)

\todo move Space Weather One-Way Connection to IPE Test Report to vlab

The following table summarizes the test results for each field. 

| Field                  |     Source Grid               |     Destination Grid        | Average Relative Error | Status |
| :--------------------- | :---------------------------: | :-------------------------: | :--------------------: | :----: |
| northward_wind_neutral | WAM T62 Reduced Gaussian Grid | IPE 80 x 170 Flux Tube Grid | 7.96E-5                | OK     |
| eastward_wind_neutral  | WAM T62 Reduced Gaussian Grid | IPE 80 x 170 Flux Tube Grid | 7.96E-5                | OK     |
| temp_neutral           | WAM T62 Reduced Gaussian Grid | IPE 80 x 170 Flux Tube Grid | 7.96E-5                | OK     |

\todo reference the above grids

In addition to analytically validating the transfer of all the fields,
a visual verification was performed on one field
(northward_wind_neutral) as a sanity check. The following two images
are from that verification. The top image is of the field at a height
of 104 km in WAM. The bottom image is of the same field at the same
height in IPE after being transferred from WAM. Each image is a plot
of the points making up the field with the color indicating the
field's values. This type of plot was used to show the difference in
the grids as well as the values.  Because of the different positions
of the points in the two plots, there is the appearance of some
distortion in the fields. However, after examining the images, the
conclusion was that the transfer happened correctly.

\image html DREV73436-WAM_Field.png

\image html DREV73436-IPE_Field.png

Limitations and Technical Notes
-------------------------------

This milestone is purely a verification of the transfer of data. Since
the data being transferred into the IPE model isn't physically
correct, IPE isn't expected to produce realistic output.