DREV53978: WAM-IPE 0.1 Side by Side Component Run and Mediator Validation {#milestone_DREV53978}
=========================================================================

\date 04/2015

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/ipe/WAM-IPE 

Description
-----------

In this milestone the 
[Whole Atmosphere Model (WAM)](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/WAM)/
[Global Spectral Model(GSM)](http://www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/index.php?branch=GFS), the 
[Ionsphere-Plasmasphere Electrodynamics (IPE)](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/IPE) model,
and the space weather mediator ran side by side without exchanging
fields using a NUOPC driver. The milestone was intended as a proof of
concept. There were two main goals. The first was to demonstrate that
WAM/GSM, IPE, and the mediator can run within a NUOPC coupled
system. The second was to demonstrate that a mediator could be built
to regrid data between the WAM and IPE grids accurately enough to make
the target fully coupled system feasible. This was a technical
(non-scientific) milestone.

\todo add WAM-IPE app docs to repo

\todo add grids to repo

In this milestone both model components ran for 2 days starting at
12/1/2009. The WAM/GSM component ran on the reduced Gaussian 
\ref GRID_gsm "GSM grid". (WAM is a different configuration of the GSM model with a
different grid. In this milestone we used the GSM configuration.) The
IPE component ran on an 80 x 170 flux tube grid (\ref GRID_IPE "IPE grid") that
extended up to approximately 360,000 km.

The space weather mediator ran independently of the two other
components, but simulated a regridding between them. To do this it
read in a grid and data from a WAM file. The WAM grid used for the
regridding was a global 3D reduced Gaussian grid (\ref GRID_wam "WAM grid"). The
horizontal resolution was T62 and in the vertical there were 150
levels in pressure. Because the relationship between pressure and
height varies during a run, the actual heights of the levels of the
WAM grid vary during a run. The maximum height of the WAM grid was
approximately 800 km. It also read in an IPE grid from a file. The IPE
grid was an 80 x 170 flux tube grid (\ref GRID_IPE "IPE grid") that extended up to
approximately 360,000 km. Because of the difference in heights, the
WAM grid only overlaps with the bottom of the IPE grid. Once the grids
are read in, the mediator then regrids the data from the WAM grid to
the IPE grid. The regridding procedure used in the space weather
mediator is more complex than a simple one step regridding. As
described above, the WAM grid's height varies with pressure, so the
vertical relationship between the WAM and IPE grids varies each
time-step. To avoid the expense of recomputing the regridding matrix
every time-step, quick 1D interpolation in used in the vertical to
interpolate between the varying WAM grid and a fixed height
intermediate grid. Full 3D interpolation is then used to interpolate
between the intermediate grid and the IPE grid. Because the
intermediate grid doesn't vary during a run, the full 3D regridding
matrix can be computed between it and the IPE grid once at the
beginning of the run. Using this method allows the regridding to be
done efficiently during each time-step of the run despite the varying
WAM grid.

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) and the supported compsets are provided
on the 
[WAM-IPE Build & Run](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/wam_ipe/build_run) page.

\todo migrate WAM-IPE Build & Run page to repo

Validation
----------

The validation of this milestone consists of two parts: components
running within the coupled system, and mediator accuracy. The sections
below describe the specific tests and results for each of these parts
for the test run.

The test was run on the zeus system at the Environmental Modeling
Center.

Components Running Within System
--------------------------------

Both the WAM/GSM model component and the IPE model component ran to
completion as part of the coupled system. As this was a proof of
concept milestone without scientific output this was deemed a
sufficient result to consider this part of the test a success.

Mediator Accuracy
-----------------

There were two parts to the mediator accuracy check. The first of
these was the use of an analytic field to calculate the mean relative
error in the regridding. The second was the regridding of actual model
data, and then visual inspection of the resulting field to ensure that
it looks reasonable.

To verify the accuracy of the regridding in the space weather mediator
a slighty different version of the code was used. Instead of reading
data in from a file, this version set the data field's values using a
function who's output value varied with location. The equation used
was:

 * F=cos(lat)2 *cos(2*lon) + 0.01*height + 1.0

Using an equation allows the exact values to be computed for the
destination field. Having the exact values allows the error to be
computed for the regridding. Using this equation the mean relative
error of the regridding using the space weather mediator was computed
to be 9.1E-05. This was deemed sufficiently accurate to transfer data
for the WAM-IPE coupling.

In addition to analytically validating the transfer of a field, a
visual verification was performed on the regridding of an actual data
field (temperature) from WAM. The following two images are from that
verification. The top image is of the field at a height of 104 km in
WAM. The bottom image is of the same field regridded to the level at a
height of 100 km in the IPE grid. Each image is a plot of the field
with the color indicating the field's values. The IPE plot (bottom) is
a plot of the points of the IPE grid with the color of each point
indicating the value. This type of plot was used to show the IPE grid
as well as the values. Because the fields are at a slightly different
height and because regridding isn't exact, there is the appearance of
some difference in the field between the two plots. However, after
examining the images, the conclusion was that the transfer happened
correctly.

\image html DREV53978-wamTemp104.png
\image html DREV53978-IPEtemp100km.png
