DREV58214: UGCS-Seasonal 0.1  {#milestone_DREV58214}
============================

\date 6/30/2015

Description
-----------

DREV58214: UGCS-Seasonal 0.1 is an internal delivery of the three-way
coupled GSM-CICE-MOM5 seasonal modeling application. Three-way
coupling is implemented through the central NEMS mediator.
 
In this revision, CICE receives from GSM dynamic fields including wind
and stress, and thermodynamic fields such as lowest level temperature,
specific humidity, height, radiation, precipitation, and derived air
density. It also receives currents and sea surface temperature from
MOM5. CICE sends its momentum flux to the mediator where it is merged
with the GSM momentum flux and sent to MOM5. CICE ice fraction and
masking information is sent to GSM. Other fields that should be sent
from CICE to GSM are exported but are not used by the atmosphere model
in this revision.
 
MOM5 receives surface pressure, merged momentum flux, mean net
longwave and banded shortwave radiation, precipitation, and sensible
heat flux from GSM. MOM5 sends ocean currents to CICE and sea surface
temperature to both GSM and CICE.
 
[The full set of exchange fields for this revision is listed here.](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11t0TqbYfEqH7lmTZ7dYe1DSCh6vOUFgX-3qvXgce-q0/edit#gid=0)
The fields exchanged are those that have a "C" (complete) in column D
of the sheet.

\todo Move exchange field list to repo
 
The UGCS-Seasonal modeling application in this revision is not yet
initialized properly.  This means that during spin-up data fields
initialized to 0. are sent into the models, and it is not until the
second coupling step that actual data is being exchanged.  The model
appears technically stable even under this condition.
 
Model Grids
-----------

\b GSM uses the global Gaussian T126 grid as documented on the 
\ref GRID_gsm "GSM Grid"
page. Internally GSM uses a reduced representation with shuffled
latitudes. In this milestone revision, the import and export fields
are defined on a non-reduced, unshuffled T126 grid, without masks. The
coordinates of the import/export grid are written to files
array_gsm_grid_coord1.nc and array_gsm_grid_coord2.nc during
initialization and from the mediator to files
array_med_atm_grid_coord1.nc and atm_med_atm_grid_coord2.nc

\b MOM5 uses a 1 degree tripolar grid documented on the 
\ref GRID_mom5_1deg_tripole "MOM5 grid"
page.  The coordinates written from the mediator to the files
array_med_ocn_grid_coord1.nc and array_med_ocn_grid_coord2.nc.

\b CICE uses the 1 degree tripolar 
\ref GRID_mom5_1deg_tripole "MOM5 grid".

\todo Link to grid pages

Coupling and Mediator Details
-----------------------------

\ref mediator "A general overview of the NEMS mediator is here."
The mediator receives the model grids at initialization and creates a
decomposition of those grids on the mediator PETs. The generic
NUOPC_Connector redistributes the data from the model PETs and
decomposition to the mediator PETs and decomposition.  The fields are
transferred on their native model grids.

The generic NUOPC_Connectors used in this milestone revision employ:

    regridmethod: redist

The mediator regridding is done using 

    regridmethod: bilinear
    polemethod: teeth
    srcMaskValues = 0
    dstMaskValues = 0
    unmappedaction: ignore

for state variables, and

    regridmethod: conserve
    polemethod: n/a
    srcMaskValues = 0
    dstMaskValues = 0
    unmappedaction: ignore

for flux variables and ice_fraction.

Coupling Accumulation
---------------------

The mediator accumulates and averages all fields passed between models
between coupling intervals.  The ocean is coupled every 2 hours and
the atmosphere and ice models are coupled every 1 hour.

Run Sequence
------------

The NEMS run-time configuration for the default UGCS-Seasonal
configuration is provided below. For details please refer to the
\ref configuring
and
\ref architecture
pages.

              CICE  
               | 
    GSM <-> Mediator <-> MOM5
    
    #############################################
    ####  NEMS Run-Time Configuration File  #####
    #############################################
    
    # MED #
    med_model:                      nems
    med_petlist_bounds:             60 65
    
    # ATM #
    atm_model:                      gsm
    atm_petlist_bounds:             0 31
    
    # OCN #
    ocn_model:                      mom5
    ocn_petlist_bounds:             32 55
    
    # ICE #
    ice_model:                      cice
    ice_petlist_bounds:             56 59
    
    # Run Sequence #
    runSeq::
      @7200.0
        OCN -> MED
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN
        OCN
        @3600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM
          MED -> ICE
          ATM
          ICE
          ATM -> MED
          ICE -> MED
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
      @
    ::

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) are provided in: 

* \ref building
* \ref running