DREV87779: WAM-IPE 0.5 Physically Realistic One-Way WAM to IPE Coupling {#milestone_DREV87779}
=======================================================================

\date Last revised: 02/03/2017

Repository URL
--------------

 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/ipe/WAM-IPE

Description
-----------

This milestone is an internal release of a NEMS application with two
active components. The active components are the Ionosphere
Plasmasphere Electrodynamics (IPE) model and the Whole Atmosphere
Model (WAM). All field exchanges in the system occur through the 
\ref sw_mediator "space weather mediator". 
This is a scientific milestone to ensure that the WAM-IPE coupled
system is behaving correctly with data flowing one-way from WAM to
IPE. In this revision WAM runs on a global 3D reduced Gaussian grid
(WAM grid). The horizontal resolution is T62. The vertical component
of this grid is 150 levels in pressure and has to be converted to
height in order to couple with IPE. Because the relationship between
pressure and height varies during a run, the actual heights of the
levels of the WAM grid varies during a run. The maximum height of the
WAM grid is approximately 800 km.  In this revision IPE runs on an 80
x 170 flux tube grid (
\ref GRID_IPE "IPE grid") that extends up to approximately
360,000 km. Because of the difference in heights, the WAM grid only
overlaps with the bottom of the IPE grid. The amount of the overlap
depends on the current height of the WAM grid.

\todo reference WAM-IPE in above paragraph

NUOPC "caps", which are essentially wrappers for the coupling
interface, are provided for all model components allowing these
components to work in NEMS and other NUOPC-compliant systems. For
example, the "IPE cap" allows the IPE model to work as a part of the
NEMS system.

In this release only a subset of possible fields are exchanged between
WAM and IPE. The 
[coupling fields spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/a/noaa.gov/spreadsheets/d/1XaQZ-sli7AlZBDLXb30AvNladSuRlTVx5LZb22OMTe4/pubhtml)
indicates in detail the status of the different coupled fields:

 * The WAM output fields are extracted each time-step during the dynamics calculation part of the model code. The extraction and calculation necessary to generate the fields required by IPE are done by the subroutine get_w_z(). For efficiency's sake this is only done when WAM is running coupled to IPE. That this is occurring is indicated by setting the wam_ipe_coupling namelist variable to true. The fields are stored in the get_variables_for_WAM_IPE_coupling module. From there they are extracted by the WAM cap and passed out to the mediator. 

 * The IPE input fields advertised only represent a subset of the full fields used by IPE. The reason for this is that the WAM and IPE grids only overlap at the bottom of the IPE grid. Transferring the entire IPE grid to the mediator would be inefficient, so only the part that potentially overlaps with WAM is transferred and used for regridding. In the IPE cap the fields received from the mediator are copied into a variable (wamfield) which has the full index space of the IPE fields. This transfer is complex because both representations of the data are collapsed to 1D for efficiency's sake. Once in the wamfield variable the data is extrapolated to fill the empty region. If acting as part of a coupled system (as in this milestone), IPE uses the data from wamfield as part of it's computations. 

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) and the supported compsets are provided
on the WAM-IPE Build & Run page.  

\todo reference the wam-ipe build and run page

Run Sequence
------------

The NEMS run-time configuration for the default Regional configuration
is provided below.  For details on the run sequence in general please
refer to the 
\ref configuring
and
\ref architecture
pages.

    runSeq::
     @21600.0
       ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
       MED
       MED -> IPM :remapMethod=redist
       ATM
       IPM
     @
    ::
 
Validation
----------

During this test both components run for a 6 day simulation. IPE is
driven by WAM fields: neutral temperature, and 3 components of the
neutral wind. The coupling (calling) frequency is 3 minute. The run
was made for 2013-03-16 under the intermediate solar flux condition
(F107=120).

A test report is available for this validation run: \subpage REPORT-20170204-WAM-IPE-1way

### Comparison with Observations

Figures 1 and 2 show that Total Electron Content (TEC) as calculated
by IPE has reasonable agreement with TEC obtained from reanalysis data
for the same date. The reanalysis data is obtained by using TEC
observed by low earth orbit satellites, including COSMIC, GRACE,
TerraSAR, Metop-A, Metop-B, Jason-2, and the Global Navigation
Satellite System (GNSS) TEC1. The resolution is 5deg x 10deg x 30km
and 1 hour. In both images, TEC is plotted as a function of geographic
latitude and longitude.

\image html DREV87779-reanalysis_tec_0317.png  Figure 1: Total Electron Content for 3/17/2013 from Reanalysis

\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0316.png Figure 2: Total Electron Content for 3/17/2013 from IPE model

 
### Demonstration of Variability Introduced from WAM

Figures 3-8 show an example of the TEC every 6 days as a function of
geographic longitude and latitude. It demonstrates that temporal and
spatial evolution of the variability in TEC has been generated by the
WAM fields that include forcing from the terrestrial weather (via
tides, planetary waves, and gravity waves, etc.). In particular, the
structure of the equatorial ionization anomaly (EIA, the density peaks
on either side of the magnetic equator) have considerable amount of
variation day by day due to the WAM winds and temperature only (even
without WAM density and electrodynamics).  Figure 3: Total Electron
Content for 3/16/2013 from IPE model

 

\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0317.png Total Electron Content for 3/17/2013 from IPE model

\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0318.png Figure 5: Total Electron Content for 3/18/2013 from IPE model
 
\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0319.png Figure 6: Total Electron Content for 3/19/2013 from IPE model
 
\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0320.png Figure 7: Total Electron Content for 3/20/2013 from IPE model

\image html DREV87779-ipe_tec_0320.png Figure 7: Total Electron Content for 3/20/2013 from IPE modelipe_tec_0321.png Figure 8: Total Electron Content for 3/21/2013 from IPE model
 
Limitations and Technical Notes
-------------------------------

 In this milestone, IPE does not use the density fields (O, O2, N2) coming from WAM. The reason for this is that the version of WAM used here does not include the necessary chemistry for the upper atmosphere. Furthermore, the version of IPE used here does not include self-consistent electrodynamics.

 

1. Yue X. (2015). "Global ionospheric response during March 17-18, 2013 storm by reanalysis and TIEGCM simulation", presentation given at the Space-Atmosphere Interaction Region (SAIR) workshop. 