DREV84205: Wave 0.1 Two-Way Wave-Atmosphere Coupling  {#milestone_DREV84205}
====================================================

\date Revision date: 11/8/2016

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/branches/twoWayWW3

Description
-----------

Wave 0.1 (DREV84205) is a two way coupled configuration of the 
[Global Spectral Model (GSM)](http://www.emc.ncep.noaa.gov/index.php?branch=GFS)
and WAVEWATCH III wave model. GSM runs on a 
\ref GRID_gsm "T126 grid".
WAVEWATCH III runs on a grid (T188) which uses the same
latitude/longitude grid as GSM. GSM passes 10 m wind speeds [m/s] to
WAVEWATCH III and WAVEWATCH III passes the roughness length z0 [m] to
GSM. GSM's physics has been modified to update its internal roughness
length values over the ocean to values accepted from WAVEWATCH
III. Initialization for GSM is performed using Climate Forecast System
Reanalysis (CFSR) data for April 1, 2015 and WAVEWATCH III is
initialized from rest.

\todo Add grid pages and reference them

This revision is a technical illustration of the two-way field
exchange between GSM and WAVEWATCH III on the same grid.  It has been
tested sucessfully on the NOAA research platform theia and the EMC
platform wcoss.  This revision has been run for 10 days and exhibits
behavior that is roughly physically reasonable.  Further updates and
study on higher resolution grids are required before further
validation can be made.

Further updates and studying on higher resolution grids are required
before further validation can be made.

Run Sequences
-------------

A leapfog coupling sequence is used with a 30 minute coupling time step.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        WAV -> ATM :srcMaskValues=1
        ATM 
        ATM -> WAV
        WAV
      @
    ::
 
Validation
----------

Comparisons of the significant wave height (HS), 10 m wind speeds, and
roughness length (z0) between the two way (GSM<->WW3) and the one-way
coupled (GSM->WW3) systems are shown below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NEMS Driver

\image html DREV84205-driver-image.png "Figure 1: Driver overview"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Time 8 day +00:00 differences = (GSM\<->WW3) - (GSM->WW3)

\note These results are from a development system and do not represent
a NOAA prediction or product.

\image html DREV84205-plot-page-1.png "Figure 2: Time 00:00 differences = (GSM\<->WW3) - (GSM->WW3)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Time 8 day +01:00 differences = (GSM\<->WW3) - (GSM->WW3)

\note These results are from a development system and do not represent
a NOAA prediction or product.

\image html DREV84205-plot-page-2.png "Figure 2: Time 01:00 differences = (GSM\<->WW3) - (GSM->WW3)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Build and Run
-------------

### Download and Build

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are in
the
\ref documentation "NEMS User's Guide and Reference".
To download this particular revision,

     svn co -r 84205 https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/branches/twoWayWW3 UGCS-Seasonal-twoWayWW3

### Run

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

  * `cfsr%20150401_10day_leapfrog_gsm%slg%T126_ww3%t188`
  * `cfsr%20150401_10day_leapfrog%oneway_gsm%slg%T126_ww3%t188`

The first compset is for two-way coupling between GSM and WW3 and the
second is for one-way coupling from GSM to WW3. To run these compset,
start within in the UGCS-Seasonal-twoWayWW3 directory and execute the
NEMSCompsetRun tool with the following command:
 
    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset NEMS/compset/<compset> 