DREV88884: UGCS-Seasonal 0.4  {#milestone_DREV88884}
============================

\date Last revised: 2/27/2017

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/UGCS-Seasonal/trunk

Important notes about this revision
-----------------------------------

\note We have noticed that Gaea front-end nodes are set up
differently. DREV88884 was tested on gaea10. We recommend that gaea10
front-end node is used when building on Gaea.

\note In order to run this milestone on Theia you must have a `~/.cshrc`
file in your home directory that contains the line `limit stacksize
unlimited`. The `~/.cshrc` with this line must exist no matter what
shell you are using! If a `~/.tcshrc` file exists, the `limit stacksize
unlimited` line must be added to it.  Description

\todo Link to revisions mentioned below.

This is the port of UGCS-Seasonal milestone 0.3 to Gaea. The revision
number of this port is DREV88884. DREV88884 is code-wise identical to
milestone 0.3, and on Theia is expected to behave identical to
DREV80567 or the updated DREV87736.  Run Sequences

UGCS-Seasonal includes two run sequences, a cold start sequence and a
time integration sequence.

Cold start sequence: The first cold start sequence initializes
components using a miinimal set of files ingested by GSM. The cold
start sequence only needs to run for a half hour. However, it runs for
an hour because there is a limitation on running less than an hour in
EMC scripts.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ICE
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
      @
    ::

Time integration sequence: The second run sequence, shown below, is
for the time integration loop. It is initialized by restart files
generated by the cold start sequence. As in UGCS--Seasonal 0.1, there
is a fast and a slow loop, at 10 minutes and 30 minutes, respectively.

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_prep_ocn
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_prep_ice
          MED MedPhase_prep_atm
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_atm_ocn_flux
          MED MedPhase_accum_fast
        @
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        MED MedPhase_write_restart
      @
    ::

Validation
----------

This revision was shown to be bit for bit with DREV80567/87736 on theia.

Download, Build, Run, and Restart
---------------------------------

### Download and Build

\todo Add link to relevant portions of NEMS guide

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are
discussed in the
\ref documentation "NEMS User's Guide and Reference".
Running UGCS-Seasonal with a cold start requires additional
instructions, below.

Please see Important notes about this revision section at the top of
this page.  Cold Start and Run

Compsets that can be run with this revision are:

 * `cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`
 * `cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`

To run compsets, start within the UGCS-Seasonal directory and execute
the NEMS CompsetRun tool by typing:

    ./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset <compset name>

If you leave off the `-compset` argument, CompsetRun will read the
compset list from a local file.

To initialize a new case of the UGCS-Seasonal from a cold start, run
the cold start compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1hr_nems%cold_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`, to
generate initial mediator restart files.  That compset runs the
atm/ice/ocean sequentially for 1 hour. It will generate some initial
mediator restart files consisting of initial values for coupling
fields consistent with the current atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice
conditions.  You then use those initial mediator files to startup a
standard run with the same model initial conditions and initial model
date as the cold start run.  To do this, run the coldstart compset
using CompsetRun as specified above with the compset,
`cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5`.

After running the cold start compset, go into NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun and
modify `setup_med_nems` to pre-stage the cold start mediator restart
files instead of whatever files are set by default.  This is done in a
section that looks like:

    cp -f ${DATADIR}/MED_NEMS/${nemsgrid}${nemsgridinp}/* ${RUNDIR}
    #  cp -f /scratch3/NCEPDEV/stmp1/Anthony.Craig/UGCS-Seasonal.r72808/20150401short_nemscold_gsm_cice_mom5/mediator*restart* ${RUNDIR}

(You will need to adjust the directory, compset, and revision for this milestone.)

Comment out the first line and uncomment the second line. In the
second line, set the path to the cold start run directory where the
cold start case just ran.  This will copy the mediator restart files
from your cold start run directory into the new run directory.

Once the cold start is done and the NEMSCompsetRun is modified, run a
standard compset like
`cfsr%20150401_1day_nems_gsm%slg%T574_cice%0.5_mom5%0.5` to advance
the model from the initial conditions.  The system will start with the
same atmosphere, ocean, and ice initial conditions as the cold start
run plus the new mediator restart files, and the model will run
concurrently.
