DREV84552: Reg-Nest 0.2  {#milestone_DREV84552}
=======================

\date Last revised: 11/18/2016

Description
-----------

Regional-Nest 0.2 (DREV 84552) is a two-way configuration of the
Nonhydrostatic Mesoscale Model on the B Grid (NMMB) and a regional
configuration of the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM). The main
features of this milestone release include 1) two way coupling between
HYCOM and NMMB with moving nest support; 2) performance enhancement.

This revision has been run for 2 days using initial condition and
boundary condition based on hurricane Patricia and exhibits behavior
that is Earth-like. The initial condition starts at 2015 10 20 12:00
hours. This is the starting time for HYCOM initialization and
integration. This regional HYCOM has a 1/12th degree resolution with
1284x516 data points spanning a geographical region (-179.76, 2.48) to
(-77.12, 39.98). HYCOM works on a regular lat-lon grid over this
geographic region. The regional NMMB grid has a single parent domain
roughly at 1/4 degree resolution with 451x451x42 data points spanning
a geographic region (-40.5, -40.5) with central location (-94.3,
18.4). Resolution of the moving outer nest is 231x201x42. Resolution
of the moving inner nest is 381x345x42.  The NMMB grids are Lambertian
curvi-linear. It can also be thought of as a rotated lat-lon grid.

Field Exchange
--------------

Currently all fields are transferred using bilinear interpolation. The
following flux fields are transferred between NMMB and HYCOM:

| NMMB->HYCOM | HYCOM->NMMB |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| latent heat flux | sea surface temperature |
| sensible heat flux | &nbsp; |
| net longwave | &nbsp; |
| net shortwave | &nbsp; |
| zonal momentum flux | &nbsp; |
| meridional momentum flux | &nbsp; |
| precipitation rate | &nbsp; |
 
Processor Layout and Run Sequences
----------------------------------

The coupled system runs NMMB and HYCOM concurrently. The processor
layout and run sequence are detailed below. HYCOM integrates using
Patricia initial condition. Hycom ignores mediator input on its first
time step. HYCOM then uses mediator input in subsequent time steps
after NMMB has integrated and provides valid input in precipitation,
radiative fluxes, heat fluxes, and momentum fluxes at couping
intervals.

| Component | Processor Layout |
| --------- | ---------------- |
| NMMB      | 0-249            |
| HYCOM     | 250-393          |
| MEDIATOR  | 394-453          |

    runSeq::
      @1800.0
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        @600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
        OCN
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
      @
    ::
 
Validation
----------

### Parent Domain

Plots of SST ingested in NMMB from HYCOM are shown here at 01 hr, 48 hr

\image html DREV84552-sst_d01_01hrs_b.png  SST received by NMMB parent nest after one hour model simulation time. By now HYCOM has run 2 time steps and sends updated SST to NMMB.

\image html DREV84552-sst_d01_48hrs_b.png SST received by NMMB parent nest at 48 hr of model simulation.

 
### Moving Outer Nest

\image html DREV84552-sst_d02_01hrs.png SST received by NMMB outer nest after one hour model simulation time.


\image html DREV84552-sst_d02_48hrs.png SST received by NMMB outer nest at 48 hr of model simulation.

 
### Moving Inner Nest

\image html DREV84552-sst_d03_01hrs.png SST received by NMMB inner nest after one hour model simulation time.

\image html DREV84552-sst_d03_48hrs.png SST received by NMMB inner nest at 48 hr of model simulation.

Limitation of this milestone release
------------------------------------

The coastline SST results look jagged in the outer and inner
nests. There are two possible explanations to this that need to be
investigated: 1) the outer/inner nest SSTs are interpolated from
coarser resolution parent domain. 2) masking along the coastline from
parent nest is much coarser than the outer/inner nest. 

Download and Build
------------------

This revision can be downloaded with the following command:

 * svn co -r 84552 https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/Regional-Nest

Instructions on how to download and build a NEMS application are discussed in the
\ref documentation "NEMS User's Guide and Reference".

\todo link to relevant sections of nems guide

The coupled system can be built with the following command after download is complete:

    ./NEMS/NEMSAppBuilder

Running the Patricia moving nest compset
----------------------------------------

Compsets that can be run with this revision are: cfsr%2015102012_48hr%nest_nmm_hycom%1_12th

To run compsets, start within the UGCS-Seasonal directory and execute the NEMS CompsetRun tool by typing:


./NEMS/NEMSCompsetRun -compset NEMS/compsets/cfsr%2015102012_48hr%nest_nmm_hycom%1_12th

Currently, the data files are only set up on Theia. The data files for HYCOM can be found at:

/scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/HYCOM/REGIONAL_HEP20/

Data files for NMMB can be found at:

/scratch4/NCEPDEV/nems/noscrub/NEMS-Data/RT-Baselines/NMMB_patricia_nests
Last Update: Feb. 24, 2017, 9:09 a.m. by Fei Liu 