DREV70089: Reg-Hydro 0.2 {#milestone_DREV70089}
========================

\date 02/22/2016

Repository URL
--------------

* https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/apps/Regional/trunk

Description
-----------

The Regional 0.2 (revision 70089) milestone is an internal release of
a NEMS modeling application with five active components: GSM
atmosphere, CICE sea ice, MOM ocean, LIS/Noah land, and WRF-Hydro.
GSM-CICE-MOM run as a fully coupled three-way system (essentially the
\ref milestone_DREV58214 "UGCS-Seasonal configuration").
LIS/Noah and WRF-Hydro receive fields from GSM and these are hooked
up to model internals.  LIS/Noah and WRF-Hydro send fields to the GSM
and they are received at the interface, but these fields are not
connected to GSM internals.  All field exchanges in the system occur
through the central NEMS mediator.  This is a technical
(non-scientific) milestone to ensure that all five active components
are able to run inside NEMS and to ensure that field data is correctly
regridded through the Mediator among GSM, LIS/Noah and WRF-Hydro.  For
this release, the outputs from LIS/Noah and WRF-Hydro are not used by
GSM, which uses its own internal land surface model.  GSM and LIS/Noah
run on a global ~1 degree T126 grid (
\ref GRID_gsm "GSM Grid",
\ref GRID_LIS_T126 "LIS T126 Grid").  MOM
and CICE run on a global ~1 degree tripolar grid
(\ref GRID_mom5_1deg_tripole "MOM-CICE Grids").
WRF-Hydro runs on a small regional domain over the Colorado Front
Range at 1km resolution (Front Range Grid).  The global components
(GSM-CICE-MOM) are currently used in the system as stand-ins for the
regional atmosphere-ice-ocean components.  The regional atmosphere
NMMB was not used because it was not available as a NUOPC component
when development began on this milestone.

\todo reference grids
 
NUOPC "caps", which are essentially wrappers for the coupling interface, are provided for all model components, including WRF-Hydro and LIS, allowing these components to work in NEMS and other NUOPC-compliant systems.  The version of each component used is:
 
 * [GSM - R69235](https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/esps/atmospheric_models#GSM)
 * [MOM 5.0](https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/esps/ocean_models#MOM5)
 * [CICE 5.0.2](https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/esps/ice_models#CICE5_0_2)
 * [LIS 7.1r / Noah 3.3](https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/esps/land_surface_models#LIS7_1_NOAH3_3)
 * [WRF-Hydro 3.0](https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/esps/hydrological_models#WRFHYDRO3)

In this release only a subset of possible fields are exchanged between
LIS/Noah, WRFHydro and the active atmosphere.  Because complete
forcings are not provided as input to these components, it should not
be expected that the land surface model nor hydrological models
produce physically realistic output in the current configuration.  The
[Regional v0.2 coupling field spreadsheet](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1plqAjA3u1cXueT9DHk3erur6kI5glxkXkwA5cxsoM5M)
indicates in detail which fields are advertised and hooked up
internally for each component as well as which fields are exchanged
with the Mediator.
 

* LIS fields advertised in its NUOPC cap are hooked up to the internal
  LIS data structures, LIS_FORC_State (exports) and LISWRF_export
  (imports), which are in turn connected by LIS to an internal land
  surface model.  At this time, the LISWRF_export data structure only
  supports the Noah 3.3 land surface model.  The list of LIS imports
  that are advertised and hooked up to internal data structures can be
  seen in columns AN and AO, respectively, of the field spreadsheet
  (linked above).  The lists of LIS exports that are advertised and
  hooked up are in columns AQ and AR.
     
* WRF-Hydro fields advertised in its NUOPC cap are hooked up directly
  to the internal rt_domain data structure.  Currently, WRF-Hydro does
  not use meterological forcings directly to compute hydrological
  state, so GSM fields transferred from the Mediator to WRF-Hydro are
  only intended to test the integrity of the field transfer and
  regridding.  The list of WRF-Hydro imports that are advertised and
  hooked up to internal data structures can be seen in columns AT and
  AU, respectively, of the field spreadsheet.  The list of WRF-Hydro
  exports that are advertised and hooked up are in columns AW and AX.
     
* Because GSM is running with an embedded land surface model, the GSM
  NUOPC cap does not advertise import fields for land surface or
  hydrological inputs.  In other words, for this technical milestone,
  the land surface model is duplicated: an internal land surface model
  used by GSM and an external land surface model, driven as a separate
  component.  Therefore, LIS/Noah and WRF-Hydro fields exported from
  the Mediator to GSM are only intended to test the integrity of the
  field transfer and regridding and are not used to affect the state
  of GSM.
     
* For this release, not all fields advertised in the LIS and WRF-Hydro
  NUOPC caps are also advertised in the Mediator. Instead, a small
  number of fields have been activated to test the integrity of the
  field transfer and regridding.  Land and hydro fields imported into
  the Mediator are indicated by an "l" and "h," respectively, in
  column I of the field spreadsheet.  Likewise, land and hydro fields
  exported from the Mediator are indicated in column M.  The set of
  field pairs for which regridding was validated appears in the
  Mediator Regridding section below.

Build & Run
-----------

Instructions on how to build and run specific code revisions
(e.g. this milestone revision) and the supported compsets are provided
on the [Regional Application Build & Run](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/couplednems/regional) page.

\todo move regional app page to nems repo

Specifying Runtime Configuration
--------------------------------

The LIS and WRFHYDRO runtime configuration files are specified as parameters when calling the component setup function in the compset file.  Default locations for configuration files are provided for each available compset on both Theia and Yellowstone.

setup_lis "[Full path to lis.config file]"

setup_wrfhydro "[Full path to hydro.namelist file]" "[Directory containing parameter files]" "[Full path to namelist.hrldas file]"
Cleaning & Rebuilding

The NEMSAppBuilder will prompt, for each component, whether to clean and rebuild or use an existing library, if one was previously built.
External Repositories

The Regional application is made up of some external components with
master repositories outside of EMC, including LIS and WRF-Hydro.  A
basic strategy with rsync is being used to ensure that changes to
external components are committed to the EMC Subversion repository and
the external component's master repository.  Technical details are
available here:

 * https://www.earthsystemcog.org/projects/earthsystembridge/lis_upstream_sync

\todo The lis_upstream_sync page no longer exists.  Find substitute or remove.

Code Repositories
-----------------

WRF-Hydro source code is available in the NEMS SVN repository.  It is
maintained there as a clone of the official WRF-Hydro repository at
NCAR (privately hosted on GitHub).  Specifically, the version used for
the v0.2 Regional app is:

 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/external_comps/WRFHYDRO/trunk/NDHM  (revision 70071)

LIS source code is also available in the NEMS SVN repository.  It is
maintained as a clone of the official LIS repository hosted at
NASA-NCCS (private access).

 * https://svnemc.ncep.noaa.gov/projects/nems/external_comps/LIS/branches/nuopc (revision 70071)

Run Sequence
------------

The NEMS run-time configuration for the default Regional configuration
is provided below.  Note that LND and HYD are run on disjoint
processor sets, and will run concurrently during each step of the
inner time loop.  For details on the run sequence in general please
refer to the 
\ref configuring
and
\ref architecture
pages.

    runSeq::
      @7200.0
        OCN -> MED :remapMethod=redist
        MED MedPhase_slow
        MED -> OCN :remapMethod=redist
        OCN
        @3600.0
          MED MedPhase_fast_before
          MED -> ATM :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> ICE :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> LND :remapMethod=redist
          MED -> HYD :remapMethod=redist
          ATM
          LND
          HYD
          ICE
          ATM -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          ICE -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          LND -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          HYD -> MED :remapMethod=redist
          MED MedPhase_fast_after
        @
      @
    ::
 
 
Validation
----------

The validation procedure for this release is to verify correct
redistribution of data from the LIS and WRF-Hydro component caps to
the Mediator and to verify correct regridding of fields among the ATM,
LND, and HYD components.  All components run for a four hour
simulation using a set of initial conditions from 2009.  Details of
the validation appear in the sections below.

A detailed test report is available for the validation run:  
[NEMS Regional_0_2 Test Report 2016-02-19](https://esgf.esrl.noaa.gov/projects/couplednems/regional_testreports_regional_0_2)

\todo move NEMS Regional_0_2 Test Report 2016-02-19 to repo

### Connector Redistribution

Redistribution of data between each component and the mediator has
been bit-for-bit validated using ncdiff to compute the per cell
difference between files and ncwa to find the maximum and minimum
difference values.  All connections reported zeros for the maximum and
minimum differences.

| Connection    |  Field                               |  Source File Prefix    | Destination File Prefix |  Min Diff  |   Max Diff  |  Status     |
| :------------ | :----------------------------------- | :--------------------- | :---------------------- | :--------- | :---------- | :---------- |
| GSM->MED      | inst_down_lw_flx                     | field_atm_export_      | field_med_from_atm_     | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| GSM->MED      | mean_prec_rate                       | field_atm_export_      | field_med_from_atm_     | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| LIS->MED      | mean_laten_heat_flx_atm_into_lnd     | field_lis_export_      | field_med_from_lnd_     | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| LIS->MED      | temperature_of_soil_layer_1          | field_lis_export_      | field_med_from_lnd_     | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| WRFHYDRO->MED | liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | field_wrfhydro_export_ | field_med_from_hyd_     | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| MED->WRFHYDRO | temperature_of_soil_layer_1          | field_med_to_hyd_      | field_wrfhydro_import_  | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| MED->LIS      | liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | field_med_to_lnd_      | field_lis_import_       | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| MED->LIS      | mean_prec_rate                       | field_med_to_lnd_      | field_lis_import_       | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| MED->WRFHYDRO | inst_down_lw_flx                     | field_med_to_hyd_      | field_wrfhydro_import   | 0          | 0           | OK          |
| MED->GSM      | (GSM does not advertise import<br> fields from LIS or WRFHYDRO) | &nbsp; | &nbsp;       | N/A        | N/A         | Not Tested. |

### Plot Generation

Regridded field data is visualized on lat-lot plots using the following Ferret command.

    shade/k=<TIMESTEP>/vlimits=<LATITUDE_SOUTH>:<LATITUDE_NORTH>/hlimits=<LONGITUDE_WEST>:<LONGITUDE_EAST>/levels=(<SCALE_LOWEST>,<SCALE_HIGHEST>,<SCALE_STEP>) ignore0(<FIELD>[d=<DATASET>]), <LONGITUDE_FIELD>[d=<DATASET>], <LATITUDE_FIELD>[d=<DATASET>]

GSM data must be regridded to LIS even though both components run on the T126 grid.  GSM populates the T126 grid cells from northernmost latitude to southernmost latitude therefore Fortran cell index (1,1) is the North-East cell.  LIS populates the T126 grid cells from southernmost latitude to northernmost latitude therefore Fortran cell index (1,1) is the South-East cell.

#### GSM: mean_prec_rate plotted on cell indices versus plotted on cell coordinates

\image html DREV70089-atm_mean_prec_rate.png

LEFT: Mean precipitation rate plotted on Fortran array indices.

RIGHT: Mean precipitation rate plotted on cell center longitude (x) and cell center latitude (y) coordinates.

### Mediator Regridding

The table below lists the field regridding operations in the Mediator
that were verified using visual inspection.  Each regridded field is
shown below in before and after plots.

| Regrid          | Field                                | Source Grid               | Destination Grid          | Link              | Status |
| :-------------- | :----------------------------------- | :------------------------ | :------------------------ | :---------------- | :----- |
| GSM -> LIS      | mean_prec_rate                       | GSM T126 Grid             | LIS T126 Grid             | \#GSM_to_LIS      | OK     |
| GSM -> WRFHYDRO | inst_down_lw_flx                     | GSM T126 Grid             | Front Range Regional Grid | \#GSM_to_WRFHYDRO | OK     |
| LIS -> GSM      | mean_laten_heat_flx                  | LIS T126 Grid             | GSM T126 Grid             | \#LIS_to_GSM      | OK     |
| LIS -> WRFHYDRO | temperature_of_soil_layer_1          | LIS T126 Grid             | Front Range Regional Grid | \#LIS_to_WRFHYDRO | OK     |
| WRFHYDRO -> LIS | liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | Front Range Regional Grid | LIS T126 Grid             | \#WRFHYDRO_to_LIS | OK     |
| WRFHYDRO -> GSM | liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1 | Front Range Regional Grid | GSM T126 Grid             | \#WRFHYDRO_to_GSM | OK     |

### GSM -> LIS: mean_prec_rate

\image html DREV70089-atm2lnd_regrid_mean_prec_rate.png

LEFT: Mean precipitation rate after the NEMS Mediator has imported and
redistributed data from GSM.

RIGHT: Mean precipitation rate after the NEMS Mediator has regridded
data to the LIS grid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### GSM -> WRFHYDRO: inst_down_lw_flx

\image html DREV70089-atm2hyd_regrid_inst_down_lw_flx.png

LEFT: Instantaneous downward longwave flux scaled to the WRFHYDRO
regional grid after the NEMS Mediator has imported and redistributed
data from GSM.

RIGHT: Instantaneous downward longwave flux after the NEMS Mediator
has regridded data to the WRFHYDRO grid.

####  GSM: Global inst_down_lw_flx

\image html DREV70089-atm_inst_down_lw_flx.png

ABOVE: Instantaneous downward longwave flux on the global T126 grid
after the NEMS Mediator has imported and redistributed data from GSM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### LIS -> GSM: mean_laten_heat_flx

\image html DREV70089-lnd2atm_regrid_mean_laten_heat_flx.png

LEFT: Mean latent heat flux after the NEMS Mediator has imported and
redistributed data from LIS.

RIGHT: Mean latent heat flux after the NEMS Mediator has regridded
data to the GSM grid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### LIS -> WRFHYDRO: temperature_of_soil_layer_1

\image html lnd2hyd_temperature_of_soil_layer_1.png

LEFT: Temperature of the first soil layer scaled to the WRFHYDRO
regional grid after the NEMS Mediator has imported and redistributed
data from LIS.

RIGHT: Temperature of the first soil layer after the NEMS Mediator has
regridded data to the WRFHYDRO grid.

#### LIS: Global temperature_of_soil_layer_1

\image html DREV70089-lnd_temperature_of_soil_layer_1.png

ABOVE: Temperature of the first soil layer on the global T126 grid
after the NEMS Mediator has imported and redistributed data from LIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

####  WRFHYDRO -> LIS: liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1

\image html DREV70089-hyd2lnd_regrid_liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1.png

LEFT: Liquid water content of the first soil layer after the NEMS
Mediator has imported and redistributed data from WRFHYDRO.

RIGHT: Liquid water content of the first soil layer scaled to the
WRFHYDRO regional grid after the NEMS Mediator has regridded data to
the LIS grid.

####  LIS: Global liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1

\image html DREV70089-lnd_liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1.png

ABOVE:  Liquid water content of the first soil layer on the global T126 grid after the NEMS Mediator has regridded data to the LIS grid.

####  WRFHYDRO -> GSM: liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1

\image html DREV70089-hyd2atm_regrid_liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1.png

LEFT: Liquid water content of the first soil layer after the NEMS
Mediator has imported and redistributed data from WRFHYDRO.

RIGHT: Liquid water content of the first soil layer scaled to the
WRFHYDRO regional grid after the NEMS Mediator has regridded data to
the GSM grid.

#### GSM: Global liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1

\image html DREV70089-atm_liquid_water_content_of_soil_layer_1.png

ABOVE:  Liquid water content of the first soil layer on the global T126 grid after the NEMS Mediator has regridded data to the GSM grid.

Limitations and Technical Notes
-------------------------------

<table>
<tr>
  <th>Issue</th><th> Description</th><th>   Solution</th>
</tr><tr>
<td>LIS Grid</td>
<td>LIS does not provide all the grid information required for conservative regridding.  Cell corner coordinates and cell areas are missing.</td>
<td>LIS is running on the same grid as GSM, T126.  The corner coordinates and areas are copied from ATM to LND within the mediator.  Although LIS and GSM share the same grid the latitude coordinates are filled in opposite directions.  Therefore when the corner coordinates are copied from ATM to LND the latitude coordinates are inverted.</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>WRF-Hydro Grid</td>
<td>WRF-Hydro does not provide all the grid information required for conservative regridding.  Cell areas are missing.    WRF-Hydro uses the ESMF cell area calculation.  The ESMF cell area calculation computes cell area in square Earth radians.  Square Earth radians are converted to square meters using the Earth's mean radius (m) squared, 6,376,0002.  This is the Earth's radius defined in the GSM cap.</td>
<td>The NEMS_GRID environment variable defines the CICE grid during compile time.  Once CICE has been compiled with a specified grid it cannot be changed at runtime.     The NEMS_GRID environment variable is set in the regional.AppBuilder file to T126_nx1.</td>
</tr>
</table>

Variable Number of Soil Layers
------------------------------

LIS provides an abstraction of multiple land surface models, each
having varying numbers of soil layers.  The LIS abstraction of coupled
export fields is only complete for Noah3.3 at this time and only
supports 4 soil layers.  The LIS NUOPC cap leverages the coupled
export fields abstraction and therefore only supports Noah3.3 and 4
soil layers.  At this this time the individual soil layers are broken
into four 2D fields, which are coupled through NUOPC, therefore
eliminating the need for an ungridded field dimension.